= A Hypergraph-based Decentralized Infinite State Machine Model Compatible with Semantic Spacetime and Promise Theory
Steve Traugott <http://github.com/stevegt>; Donaldo Almazon; JJ Salley; Rebecca Snyder <https://github.com/RebeccaSnyder505>; Angela Traugott
:stem:
:toc: macro

== Abstract

We introduce the concept of a decentralized infinite state machine (DISM) in which each agent manages its local state and interacts with other agents by making promises about state transitions in the past or future on one or more timelines. 

We postulate that this DISM framework is compatible with both Semantic Spacetime (SST) and Promise Theory (PT), providing a natural model for decentralized systems where the interaction between autonomous agents defines system behavior. 

Additionally, we propose a generic language for describing state transitions in DISM that aligns with SST and PT principles. 

This language relies on the concept of promises, where the DISM kernel (the agent) signs tuples that describe transitions between functions without those functions making promises themselves. 

We suspect that this model maintains a separation of concerns between the kernel and hosted functions that is consistent with Promise Theory.

toc::[]

== Discussion

=== History

*-- By Steve Traugott*

The year was 1994.  There I was, standing in the former boardroom of a
major international bank, looking at the README for an early version
of Mark Burgess's cfengine.  I was thinking "this is close to what we
need, but I'll not be able to get it past internal culture."  

In that year, the terms "open source" and "infrastructure" had not yet
been applied to computing. About 1% of the world's population was
using the Internet, most software was still distributed on tape or
floppy disks, Linux was at version 0.99, and git was over a decade in
the future.

Derivatives trading was becoming the most profitable business in
global finance. The bank had acquired a major competitor and vacated
the competitor's boardroom, turning it into a software development
area for derivatives trading. It was generally understood that a
trading operation needed to write their own application code to be
competitive, but that philosophy had not yet penetrated internal
culture around systems infrastructure or administration.  When it came
to the underlying infrastructure, the bank's cultural preference was
for commercial software with support contracts.

I was working on a project to automate the management of the bank's
global derivatives trading systems -- at that time, this was hundreds
of UNIX desktops and servers worldwide, built by hand, installed from
tape.  

Those UNIX machines were considered bleeding-edge, part of the
"client-server" trend that was occupying increasing mindshare in IT at
the time.  The bank's older systems consisted of mainframes and
minicomputers, with either terminals or DOS/Windows on desktops.  The
internal network consisted of 56k links between continents carrying a
mix of SNA, X.25, IPX, and TCP/IP traffic.  Thicknet was still in the
walls, and daisy-chained coaxial Ethernet was under the desks.

For automating UNIX administration, there was very little prior art to
draw from -- the MIT Athena project was the only other large-scale
system management project I was aware of.  The bank's internal network
was not yet connected to the Internet -- any research I could do was
limited to my dialup UUCP and PPP connections at home.  The USENIX
LISA conferences were the only place I knew of where large-scale
systems administration was being discussed, but even there most of the
conversation was around narrowly-focused problems such as NFS tuning
or sendmail configuration, rather than a holistic approach to managing
a large environment using code.

At that time, most systems administrators were not yet programmers --
the concept of "infrastructure as code" was several years in the
future. <<iac>>

Operating systems vendors were not helpful -- this was the middle of
the "UNIX wars," and vendors were not as interested in helping
customers automate a real-world environment made up of a mix of
competing vendors' systems.  The few automation tools that were
commercially available were better suited for the vendor's own
internal testing, focused primarily on automating installation and
upgrades for a single operating system, ignoring applications, user
data, and heterogeneous environments.  

The upshot of all of this was that, at the time, in a typical company,
the ratio of systems administrators to machines was about 1:10.  At
that ratio, scaling to the size of today's cloud providers would not
have been possible.  The only way to scale was to automate.

Worse than scaling issues, that 1:10 ratio implied hand-built systems 
that were not reproducible -- in a typical environment, each machine
was unique as a snowflake.  It was not uncommon for a machine to be
built by hand, and then for the administrator to forget what they had
done to build it.  The only way to find out was to look at the machine
and reverse-engineer it, but that, too, was problematic -- which of
the many changes made to the machine were worth looking at?  

Even worse, unique machines meant that software could not be tested in
a realistic environment before deployment.  Because the test and
production environments were different, software that worked in test
often failed in production.

Finally, a lack of automation means that application installation and
upgrades were both time-consuming and error-prone.  Even in an
environment where the machines were identical, if application
installation was manual, then deployment time was proportional to the
number of machines, and the likelihood of error was proportional to
the number of steps in the installation process.  

These issues were particularly acute in a global trading environment,
where time-to-market of new code is critical.  If you can't deploy new
code quickly, your competitors will arbitrage away the opportunity the
new code was meant to address.  And of course if you deploy new code
quickly but incorrectly, you can crash a trading floor if not an
entire market. <<knight>>

"Maybe I should just use Makefiles." After several weeks of testing
alternatives, I found myself grasping for the simplest thing that
could possibly work.  "I'll just have each machine run 'make' at boot
and from cron".  I had recently left a contract at UNIX System Labs
(USL), where an extensive Makefile-based system was used to build the
UNIX kernel and utilities -- one 'make' command would build UNIX on
any of the dozens of hardware platforms supported by the codebase, and
I still had 'make' on my mind.  I hadn't yet fully realized Makefiles
were a Turing-complete functional programming language, but I felt
pretty sure they should be able to do the job.  

I started hacking on the idea on my little HP DOS 5.0 palmtop on the
train to and from work.  I had a working prototype in a few days.  The
end result was a little shell script that pulled a bigger shell script
from a central server.  The bigger shell script would mount an NFS
filesystem to get the Makefile and related assets, and then run 'make'
to configure the machine.  It was simple, and it worked great.

The Makefiles worked.  We used them to build the next trading floor,
and with generous support and encouragement from George Sherman, I was
able to get in contact with my counterparts on other continents, hire
Joel Huddleston and then a larger team, and together we built and
rebuilt trading floors like cookie cutters during the course of the
international bank mergers and acquisitions of the 1990s.  

The last trading floor I worked on went live in April 1997, and the
following year I left the bank to move to the US West Coast so I could
focus on distributed systems and the Internet.  I had long wanted to
work on better, non-heirarchical systems for coordinating human
effort, and I felt that the bank was not the ideal place to do that. I
also wanted to get on with life -- I had been working 60-100 hour
weeks for years and was ready for a change.

I finally met Mark Burgess in 1997, at my first USENIX LISA
conference. He held a BoF on cfengine, and the room was packed.

While I was at NASA Ames Research Center in 1998, I was finally able
to install cfengine in a production environment -- we used it to
manage the supercomputers in NASA's Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation
(NAS) facility.  Doing this gave me some ideas for how to improve the
tool for mission-critical environments -- more on that in a bit.

Meanwhile, Joel and I decided to describe the Makefile-based system we
had built at the bank, mentioning it in the 1998 USENIX LISA
proceedings in our "Bootstrapping an Infrastructure" paper.
<<bootstrapping>>

Mark presented cfengine and his concept of "Computer Immunology" at
the 1998 USENIX LISA conference, and I was quite taken with the idea.
The concept of "self-healing systems" had been a frequent topic of
discussion in our group at the bank, and I was glad to see that
someone else was thinking along the same lines.

It wasn't until an incident in late 2001 <<cfengine2wks>>, when 
attempting to bring the lessons learned from NASA to cfengine, that I
realized that Mark and I had been working toward the same goal from
different directions -- and it wasn't until that moment that I
realized how much others would perceive those different approaches as
a deep divide.  This perception would soon fuel tribalism in the
systems administration community, blocking progress in the field,
disrupting careers and lives.

The short version is that, as a rough approximation, Mark's
approach was a variant of Lambda Calculus, and mine was a variant of
Turing Machines. Alonzo Church and Alan Turing demonstrated in the
1930s that these two models are equivalent in terms of computing
power.  <<church-turing>>  More on this in <<Appendix A>>.

Lance Brown and I attempted to address the Turing-related aspect in a
2002 LISA paper titled "Why Order Matters: Turing Equivalence in
Automated Systems Administration."  <<ordermatters>>   While the
long-term response to the paper has been positive, the short-term
reaction was decidedly not.  I won't go into the gory details here.

On top of the tribal drama, I was bothered by the thought that much of
the controversy was about the wrong thing.  I was pretty sure that the
centralized systems that were the subject of debate were not the
future.  I was also pretty sure Mark was thinking the same thing; he
later started firming up his own thoughts in public with his Promise
Theory work.  <<promisetheory>>

As far back as the Challenger disaster<<challenger>>, I've been
convinced that centralized systems are on the wrong side of history.
The universe is not centralized, but instead exhibits complex,
emergent behavior based on simple rules and local interactions.
Centralized systems are not well-suited to understanding or managing
complexity, but are instead fragile, brittle, prone to corruption and
catastrophic failure.  

The Internet itself is largely a decentralized system, but the tooling
we were all working on and arguing about at LISA was optimized for
building and managing centralized systems, using the Internet as a
substrate. I believe this shortcut we've taken has led to a lot of the
problems we see today with Internet-based systems and services.  There
are even RFCs that raise this concern, dating as far back as <<XXX>>

I discontinued my attendance at LISA and decided to not publish any
more papers on the subject for a while. I thought it might take
several years for the systems administration community to make the
transition to a more code-driven approach, which itself would be a
prerequisite for a decentralized approach.  

I was pretty close -- Andrew Clay Shafer and Patrick Debois started
the DevOps movement in 2009, Stephen Nelson-Smith published "Test
Driven Infrastructure with Chef" in 2011, and finally Kief Morris
published "Infrastructure as Code" in 2016.  These were quickly
followed by "The Devops Handbook" and "The Unicorn Project" by Gene
Kim, Jez Humble, John Willis, and Patrick Debois.  

While all this was happening, I continued to work on the problems of
decentralized systems myself, trying different approaches within my
own business infrastructure.  Chris Buytaert and Toshaan Bharvani
invited Mark Burgess and Luke Kanies to speak at the Ghent DevOpsDays
conference in 2018, and then invited me in 2019 -- it was interesting
to see that Mark, Luke, and I all included in our talks words to the
effect that the tribalism had become too much and really needed to
stop.  

When 2020 brought into stark relief the problems of centralized
systems not being able to handle science and technology problems at
global scale, I started funding teams of folks to work with me.  One
of those efforts is the Community Systems Working Group <<cswg>>, and
this paper is a product of that group.

In this paper, we attempt to bring together Mark's later work on
Promise Theory and Semantic Spacetime and the CSWG's work on
decentralized infrastructure.  I believe these are compatible, and in
many cases may in fact be saying the same things using different
terminology.  

I believe that the synthesis of these ideas can lead to a new way of
thinking about computing itself, including networked computers and how
we use them.  By extension and of greater importance, I believe that
the people and organizations that use networked computers (the entire
developed world at this point) can benefit from the resulting better
tools for communications and governance. 

LLMs in particular help solve the consensus merge problem for non-numerical
decisions, reduce the need to boil decisions down to numbers, and
provide an advantage over traditional Operational Research methods or
cryptocurrency-based consensus mechanisms.  



=== Introduction

XXX stop here

We propose a system for computing, communication, and governance built on consensus mechanisms, specifically designed to tackle the challenges in collaborative work and leadership that hinder organizations and communities, including non-profits and businesses.

This system serves as a decentralized computation network, analogous to how the Internet operates as a decentralized communication network. Just as the Internet is a distributed network, our system functions as a decentralized computer. It is owned and operated by its users rather than any single legal entity, ensuring that the grid remains scalable and resilient as more users join.

In a nutshell, if the <<Theory>> section is correct, then we should be able to build a decentralized system for equitable and accurate group communication, computation, and decision-making using current technology and concepts from graph theory.

The general idea is that the universe can be modeled as a hypergraph, where each node in the graph is a state of an agent, and each edge in the graph is an action taken by an agent in response to a stimulus. A hypergraph that models the universe can also be thought of as an infinite state machine.

Promise Theory and Semantic Spacetime provide a framework for understanding how agents interact in a decentralized system; a hypergraph appears to be able to model these interactions completely.

States, agents, and graph edges can be referenced by cryptographic hash in content-addressable storage, avoiding the need for central registration of code or data.

As of this writing we are currently working on a proof of concept implementation of this system, using existing libraries for low-level message framing and content-addressable data storage.

.3D hypergraph with states and transitions moving upward in time
image::images/hypergraph-openscad/graph.png[]

=== A Prediction

If the following model is correct, then we should be able to use it as a basis for design of a decentralized system that can be used to compute any function computable by machine.

It is also reasonable that, if the resulting system includes agents that are super-Turing, e.g. human agents, then the system should be able to compute any function computable by a human.

Finally, if the system includes multiple agents that are human, then it should be able to compute any function computable by a group of humans, including analysis, consensus formation, conflict detection and resolution, and decision recording.

== Theory

=== Semantic Spacetime and DISM Compatibility

It's possible that the concepts behind PT, SST, and DISMs are compatible, allowing us to develop a cohesive framework for decentralized computation. By integrating the principles of PT and SST into a DISM framework, we can model decentralized systems where agents operate autonomously, interact locally, and contribute to the emergent behavior of the system as a whole.

The health of any decentralized system relies on the promises that each agent makes to the others. It's important to consider that the developers of a system are themselves agents -- in the case of software-based systems, for instance, the developers who encode the governance algorithms issue promises regarding the behavior of the system.

This paper explores the relationship between ISM, PT, and SST and introduces a generic language for describing state transitions in a way that aligns with these theories.

For the purposes of this paper, it may be helpful to think of a promise as an assertion of fact as of a particular point on a timeline, with veracity equal to true, false, or undecided.

Semantic Spacetime offers a conceptual framework for understanding decentralized systems as a set of agents operating autonomously in both space and time. Agents in SST interact with their environment and each other based on local information and promises. Time and space are fundamental aspects of how agents coordinate and change state.

In the context of ISM, SST can be seen as the backdrop against which agents make promises about state transitions. Each state transition occurs within the spacetime context, and the "next state" in the ISM corresponds to a new configuration of the agent's spacetime environment.

By making promises about the future (the next function to be executed and its expected outputs), agents in an ISM align with the SST principle that system behavior is the emergent result of local interactions in spacetime.

=== A Generic Language for State Transitions

To enable ISM compatibility with Promise Theory and Semantic Spacetime, we propose a generic language for describing state transitions. This language uses a tuple format to capture promises about function execution. The proposed format is as follows:

`(f1, invars, outvars, f2)`

Where:

1. **f1 (Current Algorithm/State):**
   - **Definition:** Represents the current algorithm or function that the agent (e.g., an ISM kernel) is executing. This is more than a simple state variable; it's an active process or behavior.
   - **Role:** Serves as the starting point for processing. It encapsulates both the logic and the internal state of the agent before any new input is processed.

2. **invars (Input Variables):**
   - **Definition:** A set of input variables provided to **f1**. These variables can be simple data types or complex, nested structures (akin to Lincoln Stein's *BoulderIO* streaming of nested variables).
   - **Role:** Act as the external data or stimuli that **f1** processes. They influence how the agent's current algorithm operates and can lead to state changes.

3. **outvars (Output Variables):**
   - **Definition:** The set of output variables produced by **f1** after processing **invars**. Like **invars**, these can be nested and complex.
   - **Role:** Represent the results of the computation or transformation performed by **f1**. These outputs can be consumed by other agents or used for further processing.

4. **f2 (Next Algorithm/State):**
   - **Definition:** The algorithm or function that the agent will execute next. **f2** may be the same as **f1** or a modified version, depending on internal side effects during processing.
   - **Role:** Captures the agent's new state after processing. If executing **f1** with **invars** leads to internal changes (e.g., updates to internal variables), these changes are reflected in **f2**.

==== How the Model Works

- **State Transition Process:**
  1. **Processing Inputs:** The agent uses **f1** to process **invars**.
  2. **Producing Outputs:** The processing yields **outvars**, which are the outputs or results of **f1**.
  3. **Internal Side Effects:** While processing, **f1** may undergo internal changes (side effects), leading to a new state (**f2**).
  4. **Next State:** The agent transitions to **f2**, which incorporates any modifications from the side effects. If there are no side effects, then **f2 = f1**.

==== Key Characteristics

- **Algorithms as Stateful Entities:**
  - Both **f1** and **f2** represent not just functions but the state of the agent's processing logic, including any internal variables or configurations.

- **Emphasis on State Transitions:**
  - The model focuses on how the agent's state evolves over time, rather than viewing functions as stateless operations.

- **Internal Side Effects:**
  - Changes within **f1** during processing are considered side effects that lead to **f2**. This highlights the dynamic nature of the agent's behavior.

- **Deterministic Promises:**
  - The agent makes a promise that, given **invars**, it will produce **outvars** and transition to **f2**. This aligns with *Promise Theory*, emphasizing reliable and predictable interactions.

==== Relation to Promise Theory and Smart Spacetime

- **Promise Theory (PT):**
  - **Autonomy and Local Control:** Each agent independently manages its state transitions based on local inputs, adhering to PT's principle of autonomous agents.
  - **Promises as Commitments:** The agent commits to specific behaviors (processing inputs to outputs) without being controlled by external entities.

- **Smart Spacetime (SST):**
  - **Spacetime Framework:** The model maps the temporal evolution (time) and the arrangement of agents and data (space).
  - **Interacting Agents:** Agents interact through **invars** and **outvars**, influencing each other's states over time.

==== Benefits of the Model

1. **Modularity:**
   - Agents encapsulate their processing logic and state, making the system easier to understand and maintain.

2. **Scalability:**
   - Decentralized management of state allows the system to scale without centralized bottlenecks.

3. **Adaptability:**
   - Agents can evolve over time as **f1** transitions to **f2**, enabling dynamic behavior.

4. **Transparency:**
   - Explicit representation of inputs, outputs, and state changes enhances clarity.

==== Practical Applications

- **Version Control Systems (e.g., Git):**
  - **f1:** Current commit hash (repository state).
  - **invars:** Set of changes (deltas) to apply.
  - **outvars:** May be minimal or empty; the focus is on state transition.
  - **f2:** New commit hash after applying changes.

- **Data Processing Pipelines:**
  - **f1:** Current data transformation function.
  - **invars:** Input data stream.
  - **outvars:** Transformed data.
  - **f2:** Updated function if the transformation logic changes due to processing.

- **Distributed Systems:**
  - **f1:** Current state of an agent or service.
  - **invars:** Messages or requests from other agents.
  - **outvars:** Responses or actions taken.
  - **f2:** New state after processing messages.

- **Machine Learning Models:**
  - **f1:** Current model parameters.
  - **invars:** Training data batch.
  - **outvars:** Updated model performance metrics.
  - **f2:** Model with new parameters after training.

=== The Role of the DISM Kernel in State Transitions

The tuple should be signed by the local DISM kernel hosting f1, rather than by f1 itself. The DISM kernel acts as the agent making promises about state transitions. It provides the runtime environment for functions (f1, f2, etc.), and is able to influence their behavior, therefore functions should be considered components of the kernel, rather than independent agents themselves.

== Implementation 

=== Encoding

To encode the promises (claims) made by agents within the DISM framework, the following encoding standards are suggested:

==== CBOR (Concise Binary Object Representation)

**CBOR** is a binary data serialization format that is designed to be small in size and fast to parse. It is well-suited for encoding structured data like promises because of its compactness and flexibility.

- **Advantages:**
  - **Efficiency:** Binary format reduces the size of the encoded data, which beneficial for distributed systems where bandwidth may be limited.
  - **Flexibility:** Supports a wide range of data types, including complex nested structures.
  - **Interoperability:** Widely supported across various programming languages and platforms.

- **Usage in DISM:**
  - Encode the promise tuples `(f1, invars, outvars, f2)` using CBOR to ensure efficient transmission and storage.
  - Facilitate quick parsing and validation of promises by agents.

==== COSE (CBOR Object Signing and Encryption)

**COSE** builds upon CBOR by introducing mechanisms for signing and encrypting data. This is essential for ensuring the integrity and confidentiality of promises exchanged between agents.

- **Advantages:**
  - **Security:** Provides cryptographic signing to verify the authenticity of promises.
  - **Encryption:** Ensures that sensitive information within promises is protected from unauthorized access.
  - **Standardization:** Adheres to established standards, promoting interoperability.

- **Usage in DISM:**
  - Sign promise tuples with COSE to guarantee that they originate from trusted agents.
  - Encrypt promises when necessary to protect confidential state transitions or sensitive agent interactions.

==== CWT (CBOR Web Token)

**CWT** leverages CBOR and COSE to create secure tokens that can carry claims (promises) in a compact and verifiable manner. It is analogous to JWT (JSON Web Tokens) but optimized for environments where space and efficiency are critical.

- **Advantages:**
  - **Compactness:** Suitable for systems where bandwidth and storage are at a premium.
  - **Security:** Inherits COSE's signing and encryption capabilities.
  - **Extensibility:** Can include custom claims relevant to the DISM framework.

- **Usage in DISM:**
  - Represent promises as CWTs to encapsulate the necessary claims within a secure token.
  - Facilitate the verification of promises by agents without exposing the underlying data unnecessarily.

== Definition of Terms

=== Promise

A **promise** in this document refers to a non-binding commitment, roughly equivalent to an assertion or a "letter of intent." This definition differs from normal usage in US law, where a promise can be a binding commitment.

=== State Machine

A **state machine** is a model of computation that describes a system's behavior as a sequence of states. In a state machine, the system transitions from one state to another based on inputs and internal conditions. 

=== Finite State Machine (FSM)

A **finite state machine** has a fixed number of states and transitions, making it suitable for modeling systems with a limited number of possible states.  

A real-world example of a finite state machine is a traffic light, which has a fixed number of states (red, yellow, green) and transitions between them based on a timer and sensor inputs.

Finite state machines typically repeat a fixed set of states in one or more loops. Their behavior can be modeled as a cyclic directed graph, where states are nodes and transitions are edges.

=== Infinite State Machine (ISM)

An **infinite state machine (ISM)** is a system in which the number of potential states is unbounded. 

A real-world example of an infinite state machine is a git repository, which can have an unbounded number of commits over time, each representing a unique state of the repository and its history.

Another real-world example of an infinite state machine is a general
purpose computing system -- as the system operates, it advances from
each disk state to the next based on the programs it executes. (In
theory, the total number of possible states of a physical computer is
finite, limited by local storage, but in practice, the machine's state
space is effectively unbounded: Assuming a 1 terabyte disk, a
contemporary machine has stem:[8 * 2^(10^12)] possible bit states --
innumerable in geologic time at typical CPU clock rates.)

In theory, it should be possible to commit a machine's entire disk state to a git repository with each state change, but in practice, git is not optimized for frequent commits of large objects.

Infinite state machines typically do not repeat previous states. Their behavior can be modeled as an open-ended directed graph.

=== Decentralized State Machine (DSM)

A **decentralized state machine (DSM)** is a system of interconnected state machines that operate autonomously and interact with each other with no central controller. Each machine manages only its own local state based on transitions triggered by inputs. Inputs may be from local sources or from other state machines.  

The behavior of a decentralized state machine can be modeled as a hypergraph. If the group includes an infinite state machine, then the graph is open-ended.

=== Decentralized Finite State Machine (DFSM) 

A real-world example of a decentralized finite state machine is the "flag transfer method" of directing traffic at a road construction site. Each flagger has a fixed set of signals and rules for when to signal them, and they communicate via a token or flag transported by the driver of the last car in a group. <<flagxfer>>

=== Decentralized Infinite State Machine (DISM)

A decentralized ISM is a system of interconnected infinite state machines that operate autonomously and interact with each other with no central controller. Each machine manages only its own local state based on transitions triggered by inputs. Inputs may be from local sources or from other state machines.

A real-world example of a decentralized infinite state machine is a group of git repository forks, where each repository is an infinite state machine that can interact with other repositories via pull and push operations.

XXX Each agent acts independently, promoting scalability and fault tolerance. Each agent is responsible for deciding its own next state based on both internal conditions and the promises made by other agents. These agents are autonomous, following the core principle of Promise Theory, where each agent manages its own behavior and is not dictated by any central authority. Agents only promise things that are under their own control -- agents cannot make promises on behalf of others. These promises can be observed by others to inform their own state transitions.

=== Transition Function

A **transition function** is a mapping from the current state of the system to the next state. In a finite state machine, the transition function might be a static table of state transitions; the table key is (current state, input event), which returns a value of (next state). In an infinite state machine, the transition function is a dynamic table; given (current state, input), the transition function returns (next state, next state table).  

In our previous example of a general purpose computing system, the transition table is the entire disk state, and the transition function is the process of reading and writing from disk.

=== Agent

An **agent** is an autonomous entity. An agent might be a person or animal, a computer program, a machine, or other physical object. At extremely small scale, an agent might be an electron or other subatomic particle. The defining characteristic of an agent is its ability to influence, and be influenced by, its environment.

=== Pure Functions and Side Effects

A **pure function** is a function that has no side effects and always returns the same output for the same input.  

While pure functions aid in reasoning about a standalone system, it is useful to recognize that decentralized systems cannot exist without side effects; even if all agents in a decentralized system are themselves pure functions, the communications between them constitute side effects that alter the system's total state.

=== Promise Theory

**Promise Theory (PT)**, introduced by Mark Burgess, formalizes a model for understanding how autonomous agents interact in a decentralized environment. In PT, agents make *non-binding promises* about their behavior to others. The model emphasizes that agents can only make promises about their own behavior; agents cannot impose obligations on, nor make promises about, the behavior of other agents.

Promise Theory is a framework for modeling the behavior of autonomous agents in decentralized systems. It asserts that cooperation and coordination emerge from the voluntary commitments (*non-binding promises*) that agents make to one another. In Promise Theory:

- **Agents are Autonomous**: Each agent controls its own behavior and cannot be compelled by others.

- **Local Decision-Making**: Agents make decisions based on local information and the promises they have received from others.

- **Trust and Verification**: Other agents may choose to rely on promises, and over time, trust is built based on the fulfillment of these promises.

Promises are not guarantees; they are assertions an agent makes about its own behavior or state on a timeline. From the frame of reference of another agent, these assertions may resolve as true, false, or undecided: A promise may be viewed as fulfilled, broken, or still pending. Over time, agents build trust by observing the behavior of other agents and their promises.  

Frame of reference matters: Whether a promise is fulfilled or broken depends on the observer. For example, Bob may view Alice's promise as fulfilled, while Carol views the same promise as broken. Carol may then tell others that Alice's promise is broken, but it's important to note that, when making this claim, Carol is only making a promise about her own evaluation of Alice.

Relativity matters: It's worth considering that Carol and Bob may each be using the exact same criteria to evaluate Alice's promise, but they may have different frames of reference. For example, Bob may be evaluating Alice's promise while he is at rest on Earth's surface, while Carol, in a 20,000km Earth orbit, gains about 38 microseconds per day on her local clock. If Alice's promise includes microsecond-level precision, then Bob and Carol may both be correct and both in disagreement with each other. <<gps>>

Dave, observing all of the above, may conclude that when he's evaluating Alice's, Bob's and Carol's promises, he may want to add his own compensation for relativistic effects.

=== Semantic Spacetime

**Semantic Spacetime (SST)**, also developed by Mark Burgess, is a natural extension of Promise Theory into physics and cosmology, integrating the dimensions of space and time into how we understand and model interactions within systems. In the SST model, agents exist and interact within a *spacetime* fabric, where the arrangement of agents (space) and the sequence of their interactions (time) are essential to understanding system behavior. 

Semantic Spacetime extends the concepts of space and time into the semantics of system interactions. In this framework:

- **Agents**: Represent autonomous entities that interact with their environment and other agents. An agent may be as complex as a biological organism or as simple as a subatomic particle.

- **Space**: Refers to the arrangement and relationships between agents. The spatial configuration affects how agents interact and disseminate information.

- **Time**: Represents the sequence and timing of interactions. Temporal aspects influence the causality and synchronization of events. The arrow of time, often associated with increasing entropy according to the second law of thermodynamics, implies that systems naturally evolve from states of lower entropy to higher entropy. In Semantic Spacetime, this entropy arrow reflects the progression of system states and the irreversibility of certain processes.

- **Local Interactions**: Emphasizes that system behavior emerges from local interactions rather than global control.

- **Emergent Behavior**: Complex system behaviors arise from the simple interactions of agents over spacetime.

SST and PT are not limited to animate agents; they can be applied to any system where agents interact. In this model, an agent might even be an electron or other subatomic particle, which promises to follow a set of rules in its interactions with other particles. Here, too, PT is consistent; we can't make promises on behalf of another, in this case a subatomic particle, and so we are often surprised when the promises we make on their behalf turn out to be wrong. The efforts of CERN, LLNL, and other national and international labs can be seen as a continuing conversation to discover the true nature of those promises. 

SST is also not limited to linear time; it can represent branching or parallel timelines.  

Promise Theory and SST lead to an interesting observation about real-world organizations, communities, and systems of governance: At their lowest level, all systems rely on promises, and many of those promises are implicit rather than explicit. For instance, legal and monetary systems rely on the implied promises of the "social contract" between a government and its people. The standards and practices of a profession rely on the promises of its members to uphold a certain set of values and ethics. The health of any community or organization relies on promises, both explicit and implicit, that each member makes when joining and participating.  

== Acknowledgments

XXX Mark

XXX mention LLM models and how used?


== Appendix A

At the time, Mark and I had broadly characterized our approaches as
"convergence" or "congruence".  A "convergent" approach relies on
declarative descriptions of a desired state, while a "congruent"
approach relies on imperative descriptions of state transitions.  A
"convergent" tool tends to dynamically generate the sequence of state
transitions needed to reach the desired state, while a "congruent"
tool tends to rely on pre-tested sequences of state transitions, which
at the time were assumed to be human-generated.

A key point that I always thought was lost in the noise is that these
two approaches are not mutually exclusive -- they are in fact
complementary.  A convergent process can be used to automatically
generate a sequence of state transitions that will take a system from
its current state to a desired state, and a congruent process can then
be used to test those changes on a limited subset of machines and then
replay them on the rest.  

The right balance between the two approaches -- how much to rely on
dynamic generation versus pre-tested replay -- should be based on the
risk management strategy of the organization.

A research organization, for example, tends to expect machines to be
highly unique compared to each other -- users may even have root.
This environment benefits from a more convergent approach, where
differences are expected and the tool is expected to adapt to them.
In this environment, the correct response to an unexpected difference
is to note it, adapt to it, and continue.

A financial organization, on the other hand, tends to expect machines
to be highly uniform, regulated in a legal sense -- users would never
have root.  This environment benefits from a more congruent approach,
where differences are not expected and the tool is expected to halt
and alert when it encounters them.  In this environment, the correct
response to an unexpected difference is to assume that the machine is
compromised, conduct a forensic investigation, and then reformat the
local disk.

There are also several theoretical aspects that are applicable in
comparing the two approaches.  One aspect is that, as a rough
approximation, a convergent, declarative approach is a variant of
Lambda Calculus, and a congruent, imperative approach is a variant of
Turing Machines.  Alonzo Church and Alan Turing demonstrated in the
1930s that these two models are equivalent in terms of computing
power.  <<church-turing>>  

A key difference between the two models concerns the halting problem.
Ideally, we would want a tool to halt for human intervention when it
is computationally infeasible to determine the correct course of
action. Convergent tools err on the side of not halting, while
congruent tools err on the side of halting.  This difference in
behavior agrees with the desired behavior of the research and
financial examples above.

Though the two models are equivalent in terms of computing power, they
differ in terms of side effects.  Lambda Calculus is a model of a
functional programming language, where functions have no side effects,
while Turing Machines are a model of an imperative programming
language, where functions can have side effects.  

In a real-world distributed system, the communications between agents
constitute side effects that alter the system's total state -- without
this change in total state, the system as a whole would have no
purpose.  


XXX <<sysinit>>


[bibliography]
== References

* [[[antikernel]]] Andrew Zonenberg, *Antikernel*
* [[[flagxfer]]] Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, US Dept of Transportation https://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/htm/2009/part6/part6c.htm#section6C12
* [[[gps]]] Inside the Box: GPS and Relativity https://www.gpsworld.com/inside-the-box-gps-and-relativity/
* [[[iac]]] Infrastructure as Code https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrastructure_as_code
* [[[knight]]] Knight Capital Group 2012 disruption https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knight_Capital_Group#2012_stock_trading_disruption
* [[[order]]] Steve Traugott, *Why Order Matters*
* [[[pt]]] Mark Burgess, *Promise Theory: Principles and Applications*
* [[[pvp]]] Steve Traugott, *Push vs Pull*
* [[[sst]]] Mark Burgess, *Semantic Spacetime: A Practical Foundation*
* [[[turing]]] Alan Turing, "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem," *Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society*, 1936.

